Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and Bill Vernon.
Clifford Simac is a veteran science fiction writer who has been producing short stories
and novels continuously since 1938.
Simac won the International Fantasy Award for his city series, Hugo Awards for his stories
at the Big Front Yard, in the grotto of the Dancing Deer, and at the novel Way Station.
And he was honored by his peers when they presented him with the Grandmaster Nebula Award.
Simac's prolific output is remarkable when one learns that until his retirement a few
years ago, he was a full-time newspaper man.
We asked him how he decided to become a newspaper man.
There was no decision because I think I'll always do what I want to write.
And every review without a writing fiction or writing books or anything of that sort,
it seemed to me that the way to write was to be a newspaper man.
My mother, who was a very well-educated woman, had books in the house all the time and I
read them.
Now, we got a, despite the fact that we were poor, we got a daily paper.
And she used to set the table by the light of a kerosene lamp and read it each evening
after all the work was done.
And I asked her at one time, I remember, if a newspaper carried all the news, printed
all the news they were, was.
And she, in the manner of that day, and because people were not as cynical as they are now,
said, yes, that was true.
And I asked her another question that I thought was important.
I said, is all the news true?
Is what the newspaper writes true?
And again, with that rightly cynicism and faith that the people at that time had, she
said, yes, it was.
And that decided me, decided me to want to be a newspaper man.
So, Simac did become a newspaper man, but eventually he found that the type of writing
it required did not completely satisfy him.
We asked him why he chose science fiction when he decided to write fiction.
Because when I was a boy, I had read Jules Verne and I think H.G. Wells, although I don't
actually remember any H.G. Wells works, but I must admit them, Edgar Allen Poe and Haggard.
And I thought what a wonderful thing that was.
I just had no interest in the field.
I wanted to read it myself and I found out when I decided that I wanted to write, when
I found out that newspaper didn't give me everything that I wanted in the writing field.
I decided that on parts of my spare time, my writing, I naturally seemed to turn to science
fiction because it was something I was quite aware of.
I felt very sure that I could do the job of it.
And I was quite fortunate, of course, because there was no competition at that time.
If you could string the three sentences together and make a paragraph, somebody would buy the story.
Simac's combination of professions is, on the surface, a strange mixture.
After all, newspaper writing requires a lean, straightforward type of prose, whereas fiction
requires much fuller writing.
We asked Simac if he thought the styles required are significantly different.
They are absolutely opposite.
But I compartmentalized my life into two lives.
When I went to work in the morning, I was the newspaper man.
When I came home and sat down at my desk at night, I was a fiction writer.
More on Clifford Simac in our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane.
Science fiction writer Clifford Simac has been publishing almost continuously every year since 1938.
Right, but Simac's first stories were published several years earlier.
Here he explains how his writing career got started and how it was temporarily stopped.
I started my newspaper career in 1929.
And my first short story appeared in, I think, 1931.
And at that time I wrote several other short stories which were published.
And at about that time the magazine, the all magazines, the science fiction magazines and all others
ran at a hard time because the Great Depression came along.
And so there was no market, or practically no market.
So I dropped out and didn't do any more writing any other fiction writing of any kind until I think it was 37 or 38.
And I started writing again because the magazines had come back.
John Campbell had been named editor of a Stelman.
And I felt fairly sure I could sell my work to John Campbell.
So I started then again.
And I think since 1938 to 1939, I think it's 37 or 38.
There was only one year in which none of my work appeared.
There was one year at this point.
And I can't remember which year it was.
And I have no idea why that occurred.
So CIMEC became an early mainstay in John W. Campbell's stable of writers at Astounding Stories.
We asked CIMEC why he thought his work appealed to Campbell.
I've read a lot of John Campbell's work.
And I knew it, John Campbell was a favorite of what we today call hard science fiction.
And I thought that I could write that kind of science fiction.
I did write what amounted to hard science fiction for some years.
And then begin to turn it over to the softer science fiction, such most of which will.
Well, most people write soft science fiction.
They only a few in the old hands and maybe a few new beginners write the hard science fiction today.
During the first few decades he wrote, CIMEC produced short stories almost exclusively.
We asked him to tell us why he stuck to the short story form.
A short story is the training ground for the novelist.
You can learn a lot more from writing a short story than you can write a novel.
It's shorter to write, somewhat easier to write.
You don't have the time invested in a short story to do a novel.
If you spend, as a beginner, probably six months or a year writing a novel,
it fails when that's catastrophic.
But during that same time you could write a half a dozen short stories
and if only one of them sold, why okay, you have made a beginning.
So it's the path that most people take to becoming, to becoming writers or long-going to work.
And that doesn't apply only to the science fiction field but to any literature.
More on Clifford CIMEC on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and Bill Vernon.
Science Fiction author Clifford CIMEC has written numerous short stories and novels
and he has won several awards in the field.
Perhaps CIMEC's most famous and enduring work is his City Collection,
a series of eight interconnected stories written in the 1940s.
These stories featured mankind's reaction to a new situation,
in man's relationship with an old friend, the dog, and a new one, the robot.
CIMEC agreed when we call these stories a leap from his previous efforts.
It was a leap because I always regard the city stories as a sort of watershed in my writing.
I have been writing the early type of science fiction work up until then.
And it seemed to me that something better could be done than was being done.
Strangely enough, at about the same time, a number of other people seem to think the same thing.
There's no accounting for something like that happening.
We asked CIMEC what influenced him to write these revolutionary stories.
I think it was my disillusion brought about by the war that made me write the City Series.
It seemed to me that we were going through a horrible period in history
and that much of human dignity had been shared away.
That it was not the kind of world that we had lived in up until that time.
And I found myself wanting to retreat from it.
So I retreated from it mentally by going into another dimension, into another world,
creating a sort of fantasy of myself and, as it turned out, others also were able to find some wreckage.
I think if the City Series were ripped today, that they probably would not get the attention that they got back in the early 40s,
I wrote them exactly the right type of stories, exactly the right time, without knowing I was doing it.
John Campbell published the first seven City Stories, but he rejected the eighth. Here CIMEC tells us of its fate.
The first seven were written fairly well one after the other.
The eighth and final one, John Campbell turned down because he said he thought that he'd written it, he'd published enough of that of the City Series.
And so when he rejected it, I simply threw it up on the shelf and figured it was one of my rejects.
And then the writer took it down and I think I sold it to amazing stories.
And I don't recall what they called it, but they put it out as one of their horrible titles.
And then later on when it came out, it came out before my mind, it was, it joined the others.
But it was the last one that was not published by a camera.
On our next show, we'll talk about a ninth City Story.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane.
Science fiction writer Clifford Simac's most famous work is his story collection, City.
This collection of eight connected short stories was first published as a body by Noam in 1952.
Here's afterwards, Simac was persuaded to write a ninth City Story, Epilogue. Here he explains its genesis.
Well, John Camel died.
And of course all of us, all of us were shaken by his death because he was a comparatively young man and appeared to be in good physical condition.
Some of the writers reverenced him. I'm not too sure I reverenced him, but I felt very kindly and totally, I was very badly hit by his death.
And a group of the writers got together and said we'd have to put out a memorial to John Camel.
And the best way to do it would be to put out the last issue of the oldest downing stories, not analog, but the oldest downing stories.
And so they asked, I suppose there were a dozen or so people who had written for the oldest downing stories to write a story for the Memorial Lollies.
And Harry Harris was the editor, told me, and he said, Cliff, if you will write a story, I wish you'd write another City Story.
And I was reluctant to do that. I should have had a wait for it because it had been quite a number of years since I'd written a City Story.
And I knew that I had, that I was a changed writer, but I was not the same man as I was when I'd written the stories.
I worried a great deal about the propriety of writing another City Story because I figured that the last one, the last of eight, had wound up the story, the story of the Webster family, and that there was no need going further.
But the more I thought about it, the more I began to see that if I was going to write something for that Memorial about volume, it should be a City Story.
So for the first time, since I'd written them, I took down my copy of the book City and reread it, trying to catch the flavor and the spirit of the stories.
And when I read the stories, I simply absolutely ate to rewrite them again because there are some awful clouties in them.
But I knew even as I thought about that, that I couldn't do it because if I rewrote them, they wouldn't be a City Story.
So I sat down and did my best to try to recreate the flavor of the other eight stories.
I think I came very close to it, but not as satisfactorily as I've quite afforded to.
Ace published the nine stories as a group for the first time in 1981.
The robots in City are gentle, respectful entities. We asked Simac why he made them so.
Most of the writers who had written robots before wrote of them as machines.
And I wrote of them as surrogate human beings.
I made them people with some of the biases and prejudices that the living human would have stripped away from them.
And I tried to make them the kind of people that I would want to live with.
More on Clifford Simac on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And Bill Vernon.
Science Fiction author Clifford Simac has been writing for more than 50 years.
All his work, especially the well-known pieces such as City, A Choice of Gods, and Way Station, is characterized by a warm, sentimental flavor that never clois.
Simac's Midwestern roots and values are evident in his work, and the reader is caught by their charm.
We ask Simac if he purposely worked his philosophy into his works.
Not all of Simac's characters are model citizens, but none are ever terribly evil.
We ask Simac why evil plays so small a role in his work.
I'm aware of friendship, love, and good fellowship, and honesty, truth.
I get very concerned at times about the condition of the world, not only now, but in times past.
And I know what there is evil, but I kept it at times late.
Not consciously, but simply because I guess I didn't want to think about it.
I concentrated on the things I said before on the things that seemed important to me.
Did Simac ever dream back in his early writing days that science fiction would become a fixture in commercial literature?
I was thinking around hoping nobody would notice you.
You were the bottom of the heap. There's no question about it.
You were much more despicable than maybe the pornographic writers of today.
But we kept at it because we liked it.
I think after a few years of it I'd begin to feel that probably it would develop in my head of future.
But I never think that we would be putting out as great and suitable progress as we have.
How does Simac want to be remembered as a writer?
I don't know if I will be remembered.
But if I am to be remembered as a writer, I'd like to be remembered as someone who votes honestly and who is more concerned with the heart and mind of humanity than with humanity's achievements.
Clifford Simac, a writer whose gentle stories have charmed readers for over 50 years.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.